---
layout: post
title:  "My Promises Crash Course"
date:   2022-08-17 9:00:00 -0600
categories: Typescript Promises Frontend
---

I've been doing a lot of front end work lately! It's been a fun experience, especially since the typical front end technologies aren't something I was exposed 
to in a major way during school. Today I needed to write a function that required me to actually learn how Javascript Promises work, as well as how to 
aggregate Promises into a single Promise. So, heres a summary of the crash course I had to take.

# Whats a promise? 

From the [MDN Docs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise): 

> The `Promise` object represents the eventual completion (or failure) of an asynchronous operation and its resulting value.

This comes up if you want to query an external API: retrieving data over the network is asynchronous. [Javascript's Fetch API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fetch_API/Using_Fetch)
uses Promises to provide the data from requests once it becomes available. Not only that, but the `async/await` pattern that was [introduced in ES2017](https://tc39.es/ecma262/multipage/ecmascript-language-functions-and-classes.html#sec-async-function-definitions) 
makes use of Promises under the hood. Use that syntax to avoid [👹callback hell👹](http://callbackhell.com/). 

A promise is really just any object or function that implements a `.then()` method. That `.then()` method needs to accept two arguments: `onFulfilled` and `onRejected`. 
So, our mental model so far is: 

{% highlight javascript %}
const Promise = {
      then: (onFulfilled, onRejected) => {
        // 
      }  
}
{% endhighlight %}

_If you're unfamiliar with Javascript or this syntax,_ [_here is a good resource_](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Functions/Arrow_functions#arrow_functions_used_as_methods)

`onFulfilled` and `onRejected` need to behave in [specific ways](https://promisesaplus.com/#the-then-method). `onFulfilled` needs satisfy: 
1. is called when the Promise is Fulfilled
2. is called exactly once
3. is NOT called if the Promise is not Fulfilled 

`onRejected` is the same, except we call it when the Promise is rejected. These functions are provided by whoever is creating the promise. This means we can supply the 
success / error behavior the promise should have in the form of callbacks. `then()` has access to the current state of the promise, which means a promise has to keep some 
internal state with transitions. [This diagram](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise#description) shows what state machine
this object has to implement. So, `then()` looks something like: 

{% highlight javascript %}
const Promise = {
      then: (onFulfilled, onRejected) => {
        if(Promise.is_fulfilled() && Promise.didNotCallOnFulfilled()) {
            onFulfilled(Promise.result)
        }
      }  
}
{% endhighlight %}

We could go down a rabbit hole of expanding this mental model, but [here's a great article](https://www.promisejs.org/implementing/) walking through what a Promise implementation would look like.
We have enough now to see how we could aggregate promises.

# Aggregating promises
Here's the situation I was in. I was writing a function that was restricted to returning something with a type of `Promise<DataType[]>`. However, the only way I could
get access to any elements of `DataType` was a function that returned `Promise<DataType>`. In code: 
{% highlight typescript %}
async function getDataItem(dataId): Promise<DataType> {
    // A working implementation
}

async function getDataArray(dataIds): Promise<DataType[]> {
    // how do I convert return values from the above function into what I need? 
}
{% endhighlight %}

Luckily, the Promises API has a function that can perform this aggregation: [`Promise.all()`.](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise/all)
Given an iterable of Promises as input, we get back a single promise that will resolve to the array of results. So, we can call our first function to get individual data items from our API,
then package all of those promises into a single promise. The great part is that performance wise this isn't even that bad: as soon as we call our first function, thats it! It spits back a 
promise that will eventually resolve, and each of those requests aren't blocking each other. We are doing them in parallel! That looks something like this: 

{% highlight typescript %}
async function getDataItem(dataId): Promise<DataType> {
    // A working implementation
}

async function getDataArray(dataIds): Promise<DataType[]> {
    const promises: Promise<DataType>[] = [];
    dataIds.forEach((id) => {
        promises.push(getDataItem(id));
    });
    const aggregatePromise = Promise.all(promises);
    return aggregatePromise;
}
{% endhighlight %}

Pretty neat! The aggregate promise will reject if any of the individual requests reject, and will resolve when every one of the promises have been fulfilled. The promise API
also has some other functions such as [`.any()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise/any) returning the first promise that resolves, [`race()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise/race) which resolves when any of the provided promises resolve, and
[`allSettled()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise/allSettled) which returns a promise that resolves to an array containing the promises result (reject or resolve).  

Extra fun fact, `Promises` aren't supported on internet explorer! ☠️ RIP ☠️.  







